I have known of people who were caught up
with Left Vishuddhis and have become devilish
by nature, devilish.
They have gone out of Sahaja Yoga, they have
criticised Sahaja Yoga, they have tried to
trouble Me a lot.
So don’t think that, if Vishuddhi is spoiled,
there’s nothing so special about it.
It can be a very dangerous centre.
Of course, Heart, Agnya and Vishuddhi, these
three centres, one has to guard against, because
three of them can allow you, or can force
you, to become one with identification of
evil as your own.
You might just feel that it’s nice to be
evil.
You might just feel that it is a great fun
to be evil, and you might become evil.
So, at the Vishuddhi chakra, one has to be
extremely careful.
Vishuddhi chakra looks after so many things,
specially your skin, your eyes.
Skin is now, I have seen people who have bad
Vishuddhi, can have all kinds of funny troubles
with their skins.
Of course it has to do with your liver, but
skin is, the way it shines, the way it glows,
depends on how you smile, how you look at
the world.
Many people have a habit of smiling for nothing
at all, especially women I have seen, ladies
I have seen, they just smile stupidly.
That’s not proper.
One should not be stupid.
Stupidity is against Shri Krishna’s principle.
Like, you have seen the stupid people, how
they are.
Their tongue is always half way out.
If you have noticed a stupid man, his face
is that, his tongue is always out, mouth half
open and he looks like a dumbfounded fool.
Now in this only the Vishuddhi plays the part.
Another one is the one where you get the Vishuddhi’s
strains.
So such a person has very pursed lips, angry
lips, and he doesn’t talk.
The another one might even get the expression
of an idiot but could be just making a face
like that.
Because, if he’s cunning, he may take a,
I would say, a kind of a rupa (form), a mask
on his face, that he is an idiot and may try
to deceive you.
So nothing is definite about Vishuddhi.
Whatever may be the expression of a person
– a person may look very innocent, because
that’s the thing you can do with your Vishuddhi.
You are free because you have raised your
head, at this point you have achieved this
kind of a special aptitude, that you can deceive
yourself and you can deceive others.
Some people look extremely innocent on the
face.
They may look to be very simple people, but
may turn out to be horrid.
Some people may look to be idiotic but may
be very intelligent.
So it is how you play with your Vishuddhi,
which is responsible, but the main thing what
I’m trying to tell you, that you can manoeuvre
your Vishuddhi.
The way you want to put your expression, the
way you want to make your face, the way you
want to suggest something – all [these]
you can manoeuvre and you can keep your heart
away from it.
In the heart, you may have poison for a person
but outwardly you may say to that person in
a very sweet manner something that the person
might feel impressed.
But in this, all this behaviour, pattern of
behaviour, you are deceiving your Self, not
deceiving the another person, because your
Self is Spirit which knows you very well.
And this will go on and on for all your lives
that have to come.
So there is no need, in any way, to be artificial
in your expression.
There is no need to hide anything in your
expression.
Of course, I mean, if you don’t like someone,
you need not just say, “I don’t like you“.
But, in that case, you have to be not also
so much appreciative of the person that he’s
deluded into your appreciation.
Now, eyes are very important, and eyes, in
a way, are very much looked after by Vishuddhi
because the muscles of the eyes are looked
after by Vishuddhi.
Now the kind of muscles we have, which pull
our eyes, which close our eyelids and all
that, is very much suggestive.
You must notice that there are some people
who come to Me, their eyes go on like this
(flickering), when they close their eyes,
they cannot keep it shut.
There are some people, when they open their
eyes to Me, they just keep the eyes open,
they just cannot close it.
Both are in trouble.
The ones which are just keeping the eyes open
all the time, are the people having supra-conscious
problems.
And those who are flickering their eyes are
having the sub-conscious problem.
Some people have also the habit of keeping
the eyes in an angle all the time, they never
see you straight but in an angle they’ll
see you (laughter).
They think it’s sometimes, it’s very fashionable,
sometimes.
Ladies think it’s a very good way of looking
at people.
And some of them have such eyes that they’ll
go on, you know, looking and pouring their
greedy eyes onto others, or their lusty eyes
onto others.
This is the worst thing you can do to your
eyes because such people easily can become
blind, such people might have trouble of the
eyes, specially reddening of the eyes can
come to such people, very much, very quickly.
So one has to be careful to keep the eyes
very pure, the eyes of an Yogeshwara, who
was Shri Krishna.
He was a witness.
He was on this earth, He played with Radha.
He married five women, they were the Five
Elements.
Sixteen thousand women He married – they
were His sixteen thousand Powers.
But He was Yogeshwara, He was Yogeshwara.
He had no lust in His eyes, in His mind about
them at all.
He was beyond that.
He was Yogeshwara.
That was the testing point of His, that He
had no lust in His eyes about these women
that He had.
Such an Yogeshwara is there.
Of course, I don’t expect you to be Shri
Krishna.
But you have your wife, those who do not have
wife must look forward to a wife.
That, “We’ll get wives and we’ll have
a wife, ” and think of a wife who will be
your own, so that your eyes will not fall
onto every woman who comes across with that
kind of a thing.
I have seen people, even the photographs or
anything they see, it’s surprising!
I mean there’s nothing in a photograph,
what is in a photograph?
But even a photograph can attract their attention.
I mean, I don’t know what can attract their
attention like this but they are so vulnerable
and they have no control over their eyes,
no control.
They become absolutely lost and they have
That shows that they have no powers in them
and they are slaves of their responses.
So the eyes are very, very important.
As Christ has said, “Thou shalt not have
adulterous eyes“.
There should be no adultery.
Some people have a habit of showing anger
with the eyes.
You see, if they have to show anger they’ll
just go on looking like this and show the
anger.
I need, dare not, do that to you but still.
(laughter) And the angry eyes, you see, are
another dangerous things to do, with your
eyes, because then they can become mesmeric.
If you start putting your eyes onto something
and concentrating on it, your eyes might become
mesmeric, means bhoots will start coming out
of your eyes.
First of all, you’ll catch bhoots in your
eyes, they’ll settle down there and then
they will be falling on other people as bhoots.
It’s a very, very dangerous thing, to go
on looking at something continuously with
concentration.
There’s another kind of a stupid thing,
or a bhootish thing maybe, that people ask
you to meditate here (at Agnya), it’s absolutely
wrong.
[Even though] in Gita it is written, still
it is wrong.
Nobody should put attention here.
If they have to put attention, put attention
at the door.
What’s the use of looking at a window?
You can’t get out of it, can you?
If you have to look at anything, be on the
lookout for the door.
And the door is here.
The door of Sahastrara is to be opened out,
so you should not try to concentrate on this
part.
Many people who have concentrated on this
part have become mad.
When they become mad, people say “He’s
a Yogi, but has got unmanitasha” – that
he moves like a madcap.
How can a Yogi be a madcap?
That means he’s united with God, is He mad?
All such mad people are really mad!
They have nothing to do with God, definitely.
But, there are people who believe in such
things – “Oh, he is in love with God,
so he just jumps on the stage and goes into
ecstasy, dances like a madcap.”
How can God be mad?
First position is this, that the sanest personality
is God.
Has to be.
From where do the sanity comes in?
So, this is one thing one has to understand,
that any such practices can lead you to lunacy,
and one should not do it.
Thirdly, the indiscretion that one has, comes
from people who are good hearted, nice people,
but they get carried away by the smiles of
others or by the artificial goodness they
show on their faces.
I’ve known some people, they always have
a face, like this, as if they are all the
time smiling.
(Shri Mataji tries to demonstrate) I mean,
I can’t do that way.
All the time, if you look at somebody like
this, you see, it means as if you are mocking
at the person.
And there are people I have seen who are just
like this every time (a small child laughs),
and then like this!
(Mother laughs).
So, one should not be always in one pose.
Sometimes these muscles can get very weak
and start paining if you take one [pose].
There are some others who always try to show
that they are very miserable.
I don’t know, what do they want to attract?
Attract the attention of others?
Attract the bhoots in themselves or, I don’t
know, what are they up to?
Why can’t they keep a normal face?
Even while sitting in dhyan , or meditation,
I have seen them, trying to show Me, or whatever
it is, because My eyes are mostly closed,
but doesn’t matter.
When I open My eyes, I find some people like
this, like that (looking at Her smiling).
Why?
What is the need?
(laughter)
You have to have a balanced face.
That’s what Shri Krishna has described the
stitha pragnya (the witness state), the one
who is balanced.
Who doesn’t laugh like an idiot.
Who laughs, but not like an idiot!
Nor is a serious [type], like another kind
of an idiot!
So, both the things are not at all expression
of your inner being.
Such a person is, as I told you today, is
not frivolous, but not serious either.
But full of joy within himself.
He doesn’t want you to be unhappy, never
would like that you should be unhappy people.
But human beings, if they want to be unhappy,
what can anybody help, because they have got
the free will to be unhappy.
They have got a free will to cut their nose,
they have a free will to cut their ears, they
have free will to commit suicide.
They have this free will, so-called.
Now, the greatest free will comes from Vishuddhi
chakra, as I told you.
And that’s why we call Him Yogeshwara.
He is the Ishwara of Yoga.
The establishment of yoga is possible when
you surrender yourself to Shri Krishna.
[When you] completely surrender yourself to
Shri Krishna your yoga will be established.
Means what?
Means all your balances will be established.
You go into complete balance, and that balance
is complete because Vishnu, Who is the incarnation
for sustaining the dharma, Who is responsible
for giving you the balance, becomes complete
in the form of Shri Krishna.
That’s why is said that you leave all the
dharmas – “Sarva dharmanam parityaja,
mamekam sharanam vraja”.
That’s why “Surrender all of them to Me”.
So all the dharmas, if you put it at the lotus
feet of Shri Krishna, means, if you follow
His ideals, then all your dharmas are balanced.
But, after realisation, you go beyond dharma.